---
layout: post
title: Notes on Indonesia's Labor Force Survey (Sakernas) Data 2010-2024
date: 2024-11-30
categories: blog
description: Analysis of Indonesia's labor force survey data and methodology
---

## History of Sakernas
**Sakernas**(the National Labor Force Survey) is one of the nation-wide surveys conducted regularly by BPS –
Statistics Indonesia. The survey is intended to collect main labor indicators, among which are: labor force participation,
employment rate, unemployment rate, sector of employment, employment status, occupation, formality, income/wage,
working hours, etc.

Since the first implementation in 1976, Sakernas has experienced several changes in data collection activities,
such as in the frequency of surveys and in the range of territorial and household samples. At first, Sakernas was
implemented as a module of the National Socio-Economic Survey (Susenas), but has been conducted regularly and
separately from Susenas since 1986, except in 1995 when Sakernas was not conducted1. In the period of 1986 to 1993
Sakernas was conducted quarterly; in 1994 to 2001 the survey was conducted annually every August; in 2002 to 2004,
in addition to annual implementation, Sakernas was also executed quarterly for the purpose of trials, while from 2005
to 2010 it was conducted bi-annually in February and August. Since 2007, sampling for the August round has been
designed in such way that the survey data produced will be representative up to district/city level.

Due to the urgent demand for more frequent updates of Indonesia labor indicators, since 2011 data collection
activities of Sakernas was carried out every three months again, i.e. in February (Quarter I), May (Quarter II), August
(Quarter III), and November (Quarter IV). Except for August data, each quarterly survey data is representative up to the
provincial level. The August surveys also include additional samples to produce representative annual estimates up to the
district/city level. Table 1 shows changes in the Sakernas since 1976 in terms of level of representativeness, frequency of
data collection, and sample size.
